Design for serving models with different backends (#81)
instructlab/dev-docs: docs/cli/ilab-model-serve.md

# Design for `ilab model serve`

## Background

With the [request from the community](https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/issues/1106) for `ilab` to serve different backends such as [vllm](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/) and the [cli redesign](https://github.com/instructlab/dev-docs/pull/48), this design doc's purpose is to flesh out the behavior of the `ilab model serve` command.

Specifically the design of the command, its flags/options, and the how a new serving backend will be tested within the project.

## Design

Since the subject of the `ilab model serve` command is a model, regardless of the format of the model, every command takes in the `--model` flag or uses its default value in the config.

`ilab model serve` has a subcommand for each backend it can serve models with. As of this draft, the two backends `ilab` would serve with are `llama-cpp` and `vllm`.

This would lead to the commands:

> - `ilab model serve llama-cpp`

Reviewer: As mentioned earlier, this feels unnatural: `ilab model serve llama-cpp`, I would imagine something like `ilab model serve --backend llama-cpp` instead. If additional backends or more complex configurations are added, the command structure might become less clear. Using `--backend` is immediately clear that `--backend` is an option, making the command more self-explanatory.
When designing the CLI, I like to remind myself of the following:

```bash
program action --flag <option>
```

Here llama-cpp is not an action, it's an option. That's how I see things, also understand that people might think otherwise :)

Reviewer 2: IMO either option works well no strong opinion from me :)

Reviewer: @mairin I don't think the second bullet can apply given that we are going the route of generic flags and not re-using backend-specific flags. This is described here: https://github.com/instructlab/dev-docs/pull/81/files#r1631408310

Other arguments from me on why I don't like the positional argument in this scenario:

* clarity: I know the value that I'm passing to `--backend` is a backend, when I pass `llama-cpp`, I might have no clue what it is
* stability: once we introduce `ilab model serve llama-cpp` we are blocked from adding any other things than a backend. Using `--backend` removes that problem. What if one day we want to add another verb/noun to `ilab model serve <whatever>`.
* consistency: it's a common CLI design practice to use flags to specify options

Reviewer 3: One point that helps me decide these choices --

For llamacpp vs vllm, are the rest of the --flags identical? If not I'd prefer separate commands vs a --backend flag. I would prefer only doing something like `--backend` if the rest of the flags apply equally to both (and any future backend)

Author: @leseb Of the arguments you mentioned the one that stuck out to me the most is stability, in the sense that the next subcommand after `ilab model serve` has to be a backend. I understand wanting the flexibility for that subcommand in the future, but I'd argue we see the need for it now so we should just do it. 

Also I don't think it's the end of the world if the possibilities for the next subcommand aren't consistent. In fact if you start at the `ilab model` level, the only commonality is that the next level of sub-commands are related to models. The same principle applies to `ilab model serve`; the subcommands are related to model serving.

Reviewer: > @leseb Of the arguments you mentioned the one that stuck out to me the most is stability, in the sense that the next subcommand after `ilab model serve` has to be a backend. I understand wanting the flexibility for that subcommand in the future, but I'd argue we see the need for it now so we should just do it.

Honestly, this isn't very future-proof. Since we're starting from scratch, we have the opportunity to design with future growth in mind and enhance user experience clarity.

> 
> Also I don't think it's the end of the world if the possibilities for the next subcommand aren't consistent. In fact if you start at the `ilab model` level, the only commonality is that the next level of sub-commands are related to models. The same principle applies to `ilab model serve`; the subcommands are related to model serving.

Yes, but today we think about `ilab model serve backend.` What if we later realized that the backend was just one of the possible sub-commands? It's not the end of the world, but it will degrade the user experience.

Reviewer 2: While I was originally neutral, and perhaps leaning towards the subcommand. The recent proposals on the introduction of profiles shifted my perspective quite a bit on this one. 

I argue that with this capability users won't need to (or want to) care which backend is used to serve their model, all they really care about is that there model get served in a way that works and is optimal for the system they are using, and in a way that leads to good ilab results. Even if they do change it, often they will have only one workable choice for their system and use-case. As an example, running the full hifi SDG won't be possible with llama.cpp (at least today), and likewise, vllm is a bit too resource hungry for smaller scale systems.

Based on the above I think we should view this selection as an advanced option / parameter as opposed to a routine subcommand. There's also a compatibility aspect where users get guided into specifying a particular backend (since it's prominent when a subcommand) they might think they need to do this, and we could start to see more scripts and automation tied to it, which would make it harder for us to swap in a different technology we might introduce in the future (e.g say a server optimized for a particular model type, or specific GPU type). Granted this is still a risk with having the option at all, just likely less as an advanced option. 

Finally, I think there's an opportunity where we can make the technology more accessible by presenting higher level, more generic options. For those that are very specific to a particular backend we probably wouldn't want to continually sync ever low-level option, and those could be primarily pass through via the `[--vllm|--llama-cpp-args]` mechanism in this proposal.

Thoughts? 

I know we want to get this in asap, and ultimately I think we can make both approaches work. But I thought i would give this one more check in light of other recent design decisions.

- `ilab model serve vllm`

The flags for `ilab model serve` are either backend agnostic or specific to a subcommand and are prefixed to indicate that. The intention behind this choice is to ensure there is no mix up of flags between backends.

```console
ilab model serve
|

> |_______ --model

Author: I meant to have this be the flags for either backend, not another subcommand.

|
|_______ (other backend agnostic flags)
|
|_______ llama-cpp
|        |
|        |_______ --llama-cpp-num-gpus
|        |
|        |_______ --llama-cpp-max-ctx-size
|        |
|        |_______ (other llama-cpp specific args)
|
|_______ vllm
|        |
|        |_______ --vllm-chat-template
|        |
|        |_______ (other popular vllm-specific specific args)
|        |
|        |_______ --vllm-args
```

## Command Examples

### Bare-bones but model specific command

```shell
ilab model serve --model <PATH> 
```

- Serves the model at `<PATH>`.
- If the `<PATH>` is the path for a `.gguf` file then `llama-cpp` is automatically used as the model serving backend.
- If the path is a directory, `vllm` is automatically used as the backend.
- The path provided to `vllm` can either be to a Hugging Face repo or a directory with `.safetensors`.

> 

Reviewer 4: Yes! Love this mechanism. Gives us a way to be opinionated - provide a good default - but also flexible enough that the user who has their own opinions can express them!

### Bare-bones command

```shell
ilab model serve
```

> - This command has the same behavior as the one above but the `--model-path` is whatever the default model path is in the config. This is the existing behavior of `ilab serve` today.

Reviewer 4: is there an inconsistency here? Up on line 51 you're calling it `--model` - here on 65 you're calling it `--model-path` ?

Author: This is meant to be `--model` since we serve models not model paths!

### Llama-cpp backend specific commands

```shell

> ilab model serve llama-cpp --model <PATH> --llama-cpp-gpu-layers 4 --llama-cpp-max-ctx-size 1024

Reviewer: A point I've raised before, I'm not sure if it makes sense to prefix everything with `--llama-cpp` if we know we are using the llama-cpp backend.

Author: The reason I made it so specific is that I'm scarred by the flags for training that exist in the codebase as of 6/7/24. It's not clear which training flags belong with the mac implementation of training vs the linux implementation and on top of that the flags are very similar.

An example of how the flags could be mixed up. Current ilab serve with llama-cpp has a flag for `max-ctx-size`. `vllm` has a flag for model context length called `--max-model-len` (https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/serving/openai_compatible_server.html#command-line-arguments-for-the-server). 

We could do the following possibilities:
1. Have a flag for `--max-model-len` and `--max-ctx-size` similar to how we have it in current `ilab train`. I think this option is hardest on the user.

2. Have one flag for context size called `--max-ctx-size` whose value is filtered down to each backend. An issue then becomes what do you do with flags that one backend has that one doesn't. Also you've now added this flag into the set of flags that both backends can use. 

In my current design I propose we make backend agnostic flags those flags have nothing to do with the configuration of the backend itself and more for the configuration of `ilab` and what the backends are operating on (like the model path).

3. Prefix all flags related to a backend with the backend name. I think this is the most clear for the users with the downside that it's more verbose.

@cdoern what do you think about how the flags for training might look. Training will have a similar set of possible subcommands with numerous options.

Reviewer 2: > In my current design I propose we make backend agnostic flags those flags have nothing to do with the configuration of the backend itself and more for the configuration of ilab and what the backends are operating on (like the model path).
 +1 this is the right approach to create and use generic flags yet still have a mechanism for provider specific flags.

Reviewer: I'm open to building generic flags, but it feels like we're creating a third layer of abstraction, which might introduce some ambiguity. Users will have to juggle raw flags from llama-cpp, as well as flags from ilab, which could complicate their mental model when writing commands. However, I do like the idea of re-using sensible flags and handling the backend mapping internally.

In the end, we could adopt two strategies:

* Backend-Agnostic Flags: Select the most common flags that make sense across multiple backends.
* Backend-Specific Flags: Use --vllm-args (or similar) for backend-specific configurations.

There might still be issues, such as someone passing ilab model serve --backend llama-cpp --llama-cpp-max-ctx-size 1 --llama-cpp-args "llama-cpp-max-ctx-size 2". However, we can address this through proper validation and error messaging.

Author: After doing some more research I'm removing the backend specific prefixes from the backend specific flags. The way we're using `click` for subcommands, flags between backends cannot be shared.

So running `ilab model serve vllm --help` would yield a different message than `ilab model serve --help` and `ilab model serve llama-cpp --help`. 

For this reason I'm not worried about users mixing up arguments as long as there are subcommands.

This is another reason why I believe going subcommands instead of having a  `--backend` flag to choose the backend.

```

- This command serves a model with `llama-cpp`.

> - If the path provided is not to a `.gguf` file, this command would error out.

Reviewer: I don't think we should rely on the extension but have a function/script to read the image and tell us the format instead.

Author: I can make this statement more general, the point of the bullet is that the command auto detects that it can't serve the format specified and throws an error with feedback for the user.

Reviewer 2: One other point to consider is that it's likely we may have multiple backends that support overlapping formats. To address that we could have a config flag to specify the intended default backend. Although that can be a later design enhancement. I only mention it to show the existing design here is compatible with expansion

Reviewer 4: @n1hility Agreed. Great idea.

- The existing flags to `ilab serve` (besides `--model-path` & `--log-file`) are now specific to the llama-cpp backend and are prefixed with `--llama-cpp-` to indicate that.

### vllm backend specific commands

```shell
ilab model serve vllm --model <PATH> --vllm-chat-template <PATH> --vllm-args "<MORE VLLM SPECIFIC ARGS>"
```

- This command serves a model with `vllm`.

> - If the path provided is not a directory, this command would error out.

Reviewer 4: Instead of error out, I'd suggest it suggest the correct backend. E.g., 

`You specified vllm but you've provided a gguf file which is not supported by vllm. Would you like to run the gguf file using llamacpp?`

Author: I think you're suggesting that the command would steer the user to use the correct backend instead of the command being run again.

I think this is an awesome idea but out of scope for a first PR of introducing a `vllm` backend. I'll be sure to make a follow up issue for this feature.

- There are [dozens](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/serving/openai_compatible_server.html#command-line-arguments-for-the-server) of flags for vllm. Whichever arguments the community deems the most important to include, will be added as flags to `ilab model serve vllm` with `--vllm-` as a prefix.

> - Any remaining arguments can be specified in the value of the flag `--vllm-args`.

Reviewer: The only issue with this approach is how can we easily translate a given arg to an internal value? With a flag that is very easy to do. The downside with the flag is that we keep playing catching with every flag vllm produces...

Author: I don't think I'm being very clear here, the intention of `--vllm-args` is to not play catch up with every flag vllm has, but instead is intended to be a catch-all flag for all of it's arguments, which is something I think you'd support.

For example the community deams the [vllm arguments](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/serving/openai_compatible_server.html#command-line-arguments-for-the-server) `--chat-template` and `--download-dir` to be ones that we use often and want to have flags for the subcommand. 

Those would get prefixed with `--vllm-` and become `--vllm-chat-template` and `--vllm-download-dir`. 

If a user wanted to specify more "obscure" arguments to vllm like the `--kv-cache-dtype` and `--block-size` when serving vllm, an example of a command would be:

`ilab model serve vllm --vllm-download-dir <PATH> --vllm-args "--kv-cache-dtype auto --block-size 16"`.

The value of `--vllm-args` is just getting passed straight into the vllm upon startup. The main function of the openai compatible server take and processes all arguments on start up.

Reviewer 2: Another example of why this is necessary is that a user also needs to sometimes use hidden behavioral flags that do not have a long lifespan to work around a problem in the backend. Yet another case would be cuda flags that vllm needs to pass through

Reviewer 4: I like the catchall approach. It's one we used to handle arguments to plugins we don't control in the ChRIS project. It has worked well.

Reviewer: Ok now it's clearer, I'm ok with the `--vllm-args` value being passed as is straight upon vllm startup.

# Design for `ilab model serve`

## Background

> With the [request from the community](https://github.com/instructlab/instructlab/issues/1106) for `ilab` to serve different backends such as [vllm](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/) and the [cli redesign](https://github.com/instructlab/dev-docs/pull/48), this design doc's purpose is to flesh out the behavior of the `ilab model serve` command.

Reviewer 3: The CLI redesign link can be updated to point to the merged doc

> Specifically the design of subcommand's of `ilab model serve` that apply to different serving backends.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Specifically, this doc addresses the design of subcommands of `ilab model serve` that apply to different serving backends.
```

## Design

Since the subject of the `ilab model serve` command is a model, regardless of the format of the model, every command takes in the `--model` flag or uses its default value in the config.

`ilab model serve` has a subcommand for each backend it can serve models with. As of this draft, the two backends `ilab` would serve with are `llama-cpp` and `vllm`.

This would lead to the commands:

- `ilab model serve llama-cpp`
- `ilab model serve vllm`

There are specific flags for `ilab model serve` that would apply to all backends. These can be viewed by running `ilab model serve --help`. 
For the specific subcommands, each has their own flags that can be viewed via `ilab model serve <BACKEND> --help`.
This ensures there is no mix up of flags between backends.

The following is an overview for the flags of `ilab model serve`:

```console
ilab model serve
|
|_______ --model
|
|_______ (other backend agnostic flags)
|
|_______ llama-cpp
|        |

> |        |_______ --llama-cpp-num-gpus

Author: This was is a mistake that got cleaned up in the most recent commit. There are no flag prefixes anymore per the design doc

|        |
|        |_______ --max-ctx-size
|        |
|        |_______ (other llama-cpp specific args)
|
|_______ vllm
|        |
|        |_______ (popular vllm-specific specific args)
|        |
|        |_______ --vllm-args
```

## Command Examples

### Bare-bones but model specific command

```shell
ilab model serve --model <PATH> 
```

- Serves the model at `<PATH>`.
- If the `<PATH>` is the path for a model that can be run by `llama-cpp` then `llama-cpp` is automatically used as the model serving backend.
- If the `<PATH>` is the path for a model that can be run by `vllm` then `vllm` is automatically used as the model serving backend.

> - If the model at `<PATH>` can be run by either backend, then a default backend defined in the config will be used as the model serving backend.

Reviewer 3: What if no backend is specified in the config?

how would express this config option? Config options and flags are the same thing. A config item here implies “—backend <foo>”

Reviewer 2: This another reason  I think we should take another look at just making this an option (consistency between config and flags)

```suggestion
- If the model at `<PATH>` can be run by either backend, then a default backend defined in the config will be used as the model serving backend. In the case where there is ambiguity and a setting is not defined, a hardcoded preference will be used (all currently supported providers do not have this issue). A future profile specification will likely replace the hardcoded fallback. 
```

### Bare-bones command

```shell
ilab model serve
```

- This command has the same behavior as the one above but the `--model` is whatever the default model path is in the config. This is the existing behavior of `ilab serve` today.

### Llama-cpp backend specific commands

```shell

> ilab model serve --model <PATH> llama-cpp gpu-layers 4 max-ctx-size 1024

Author: This is a mistake and it should be updated in the most recent commit.

```

- This command serves a model with `llama-cpp`.
- If the model provided is not able to be served by llama-cpp, this command would error out and suggest an alternate backend to use.
- The existing flags to `ilab serve` (besides `--model-path` & `--log-file`) are now specific to the llama-cpp backend.

### vllm backend specific commands

```shell
ilab model serve --model <PATH> vllm --chat-template <PATH> --vllm-args "<MORE VLLM SPECIFIC ARGS>"
```

- This command serves a model with `vllm`.
- If the path provided is not able to be served by `vllm`, this command would error out and suggest an alternate backend to use.

> - There are [dozens](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/serving/openai_compatible_server.html#command-line-arguments-for-the-server) of flags for vllm. Whichever arguments the community deems the most important to include, will be added as flags to `ilab model serve vllm`.

Reviewer 3: It’s probably easier to just have a pass through mechanism. I don’t see much value in replicating their config options in our own.

Reviewer 3: I see the next line proposes that already… I’d prefer stating that pass through is the default answer unless we have a really good reason otherwise

Reviewer 2: +1 thats where I land. Ideally generic shared options that are intuitive and then passthrough so we don't have to keep a mirror in sync.
